***noslegal***

**Taxonomy release notes**

**Release 2.1** / July 2024

This document provides release notes for an update to our Legal Places taxonomy facet.

## About Legal Places

Please see our [31 March 2022 release notes](https://github.com/noslegal/taxonomy/blob/main/release%20notes/2022.03.31-noslegal-release-notes-taxonomy.md) for a summary of Legal Places.

## Summary of release
- This release is a minor one. It reflects various changes and corrections since the last update.
- Highlights include:
    - Addition of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, bringing the total number of treaties covered up to 55.
    - Updates to legal systems to be consistent with the verification sources used.
    - Administrative changes of subdivisions in various countries.
    - Updates to reflect new members of various international conventions.
    - Updating of stale or broken links across facets.


## Acknowledgements
This update was largely prepared by Marius Manole, with a review by Graeme Johnston.

### Places Core - Countries and Areas
- Changed the "ISO English short name if different from noslegal name" of Venezuela from "Venezuela (Bolivian Republic of)" to "Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)".

Updates based on the following source:

https://www.iso.org/obp/ui

### Places XP1.1-Non-Eng names
- Added the "UN Chinese short name" of Hong Kong as "中国香港特别行政区".
- Changed the "UN Chinese short name" of Netherlands from "荷兰' to '荷兰王国".
- Added the "UN Russian short name" of Hong Kong as "Китай, Специальный административный район Гонконг".
- Changed the "UN Russian short name" of Netherlands from "Нидерланды" to "Нидерланды (Королевство)".
- Added the "UN French short name" of Hong Kong as "Chine, région administrative spéciale de Hong Kong".
- Changed the "UN French short name" of Netherlands from "Pays-Bas" to "Pays-Bas (Royaume des)".
- Added the "UN Spanish short name" of Hong Kong as "China, región administrativa especial de Hong Kong".
- Changed the "UN Spanish short name" of Netherlands from "Países Bajos" to "Países Bajos (Reino de los)".
- Added the "UN Arabic short name" of Hong Kong as "الصين، منطقة هونغ كونغ الإدارية الخاصة".
- Changed the "UN Arabic short name" of Netherlands from "هولندا" to "هولندا (مملكة _)".

Updates based on the following source:

https://unstats.un.org/unsd/methodology/m49/overview/


### Places XP3.1 - Legal Systems
- Added the "Customary" Legal Type to Burundi and the "Hybrid" designation to its legal system.
- Updated the verification link for Brunei to a CIA World Factbook reference, as the previous link expired.
- Added the "Customary" Legal Type to Gabon and the "Hybrid" designation to its legal system.
- Added the "Customary" Legal Type to Ghana and the "Hybrid" designation to its legal system.
- Added the "Customary" Legal Type to Guadeloupe and the "Hybrid" designation to its legal system.
- Added the "CIA World Factbook" Verification link to Japan.
- Added the "CIA World Factbook" Verification link to French Polynesia.
- Changed the "Hybrid legal type" of South Sudan from "Civil" to "Common" and updated the Verification link to South Sudan's Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.
- Added the "Hybrid" and "Civil" legal types to Turks and Caicos and updated the verification link to a CIA World Factbook reference.
- Added the "Hybrid" and "Customary" legal types to Uganda.
- Changed the Legal type of Saint Vincent from "Civil" to "Common".
- Updated the Verification link of Vietnam to the NY University GlobaLex site, as the previous link expired.

Updates based on the following sources:

https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/

https://www.nyulawglobal.org/globalex/


### Places XP4.1 - Subdivisions
- Added the "Papua Barat Daya" Province to Indonesia.
- Changed the ISO code of Odisha (India) from "IN-OR" to "IN-OD".
- Changed the ISO code of Chhattīsgarh (India) from "IN-CT" to "IN-CG".
- Changed the ISO code of Telangana (India) from "IN-TG" to "IN-TS".
- Changed the ISO code of Uttarakhand (India) from "IN-UT" to "IN-UK".
- Changed the Subdivision type of Gangwon (Korea (Republic)) from "Province" to "Special Self-Governing Province".
- Added the "Zeta" municipality to Montenegro.
- Changed the noslegal succinct English name of Pradesh 1 (Nepal) to "Koshi".
- Removed the Maguindanao province from Philippines.
- Added the Maguindanao del Norte province to Philipines.
- Added the Maguindanao del Sur province to Philipines.
- Changed the noslegal succinct English name of Kuyavia-Pomerania (Poland) to Kujawsko-Pomorskie.
- Changed the noslegal succinct English name of Warmia-Masuria (Poland) to Warmińsko-Mazurskie.

Updates based on the following source:

https://www.iso.org/obp/ui


### Places XP6.1 - Memberships
- Added 27 member countries to the 2019 Hague Judgments Convention, with a starting date of 2023-09-01.
- Added Ukraine to the 2005 Hague Choice of Court Convention.
- Added Ecuador, Azerbaijan, Canada and Botswana to the 2007 Hague Child Support Convention.
- Removed Ukraine from the Commonwealth of Independent States.
- Added Somalia to the East African Community (EAC).
- Added Canada and China to the 1961 Hague Apostille Convention.
- Added Paraguay, Singapore and Azerbaijan to the 1965 Hague Service Convention.
- Added Paraguay and El Salvador to the 1970 Hague Evidence Convention.
- Removed Hong Kong and Macao from the 1980 Hague Child Abduction Convention.
- Added Cabo Verde to the 1996 Hague Child Protection Convention.
- Added the 124 member countries of the Rome Statute.

Updates based on the sources listed in Places XP6.2 - Treaties.

### Places XP6.2 - Treaties
- Updated the Link for the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, as the previous one expired.
- Updated the Link for the Central American Integration System, as the previous one expired.
- Updated the Link for the United States - Mexico - Canada Agreement, as the previous one expired.
- Added the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court to the list of treaties.